So now we move towards
really everyone's favorite
part of frontend engineering,
making API requests.
Now, I want the record to
show that when I found just
a reasonably sized
collection of dog facts, and
I was using the Fetch API,
I was not trying to make a pun.
I also want the record to show I had
weeks to avoid making this pun and
choosing literally any other dataset and
I chose to go with it, so I'm aware.
It wasn't intentional,
but I committed to it.
So yes, we will fetch dog facts.
Don't ask me, okay?
You should have an API, that's no s there,
I just gotta change that, but
http, api, localhost:3333.
If for
some reason your API server doesn't work,
I also have a version
of it hosted as well.
They're both options.
So we're gonna use, no s,
http://localhost:3333, and
this API has some fun features.
Basically, it has query params that
may let you make it worse, yeah.
What API doesn't need that?
So it has the ability to add a delay to
it, to have it fail intermittently, and
all sorts of fun stuff like that.
So we can recreate bad situations.
But we have that in place.
So if I go over here, and we have we have
the ability to do stuff asynchronously,
we know that from and from fetch give us
observables, iterator counter is neat.
But like not gonna get you that
promotion you're looking for.
[LAUGH] So let's look at what this would
look like with an API
request like a real API.
So we have this in place and
we've got this fetch button on the page,
let's go take a look at that UI.
We'll start with this fetch button.
It'll fetch you some dog facts.
Who doesn't like dog facts?
So we'll say fetch, which again,
I apologize for nothing.
And we'll say fromEvent, when they
click on that fetchButton in this case.
One of the interesting things too is,
on one hand,
we're writing vanilla JavaScript.
On the other hand,
knowing exactly what to do and
be able to surgically update the DOM where
we need to is effectively how a lot of
the more recent frontend frameworks work,
right?
I care about when these given events
change, and here are the places where
you need to change them in the DOM is how
a bunch of if you've ever looked at those,
like what is the fastest
frameworks in 2020/2021?
A lot of them is how effectively
these concepts are being used versus
did something change on the walk
an entire virtual DOM, right?
And so the ability to just
know what value changed and
know where to change it is
an incredibly powerful idea.
I digress.
So we've got merge map in here.
And so we're saying when
that click comes through,
I don't really care what the event is,
I wanna merge map, right?
Because what I wanna do
is return a fromFetch.
I wanna turn that click
into a fetch request.
If I just use map, it's gonna be like
yeah, here's an observable this we wanted.
No, no, I wanted a water by fetch request.
I didn't want it observable.
So we've got this kind of in place here.
So we've got mergeMap in this case,
and then I don't really
care what the button,
I've attached it to the right button.
I don't care about the event,
I don't care about the target value,
it's not an input field.
If I was doing this on an input field,
I might care about the value.
I don't, I just care that the button was
clicked, it's all I'm interested in.
And then we've got fromFetch,
we'll send it to our end point.
Endpoint, endpoint, and
then that we're gonna wanna do stuff with.
Cuz you know one does not
simply use the Fetch API and
get back an object like get JSON on
a certain perfect library known as jQuery.
No, one gets a response object which
they have to call either .json on,
or .blob, or what have you, right?
So not only does fetch need to
merge map into the request, but
with that observable, and let's just put
that return there now before I forget.
With that observable,
we're also gonna need to pipe
that through some things, right?
Cuz fetch, cool, cool,
fetch me the response,
response to JSON, so on and so forth.
So in this case, we will say .pipe.
So you think a map or mergeMap?
>> Merge version.
>> Why?
What's that?
>> Just a map.
>> All right, so we have one vote for
just the map, any votes for mergMap?
I heard mergeMap until somebody said map,
and everybody got quiet.
>> Are we expecting more observables to
be-
>> SwitchMap.
>> We have SwitchMap.
>> Fetch would not be
returning an observable.
I haven't looked at that function, though.
>> So a normal fetch, what does
a normal fetch return, so we say fetch-
>> Promise.
>> That returns a promise.
Then that response,
response .json is also a promise, right?
So I heard you like observables or
promises each one.
It's interesting.
It's not wrong to think about if you were
gonna use a .then,
mergeMap is probably your best bet, right?
Because the chaining of the observables
promise it will basically
run the values if it is a observable
like they'll run through from, right?
Or it'll treat it like an observable.
So in this case,
because response.json returns a promise,
that also needs to get merge mapped also.
Again, the handy mnemonic that I
literally just invented right now is,
if you're gonna use .then,
you'd wanna use a mergeMap.
So I've got a pipe here and
then we'll mergeMap.
Yep.
Response or JSON, perfect.
When prettier is happy with you,
then everything mostly works in this case.
So then from fetch, We will subscribe,
I will say, addFacts should do the trick.
There is my dog facts, great.
A lot of other things there, cool.
So in this case, we are now able
to take an event, map it into
a promise from a fetch, map that to
a response, and show it into the UI.
But this is great, there's
a wonderful API, assuming your server
never goes down, right, and
nothing bad happens on the Internet.
So what do we do in that case, right?
We could, for instance, go ahead.
And let's add a little bit of delay.
And so I, in this case, can modify
the API a little bit when I say delay.
Let's say it takes two seconds to respond.
And just to make things worse,
we can have this element of chaos,
Where kinda like two seconds, like roughly
two seconds, cuz again, it's hard to
simulate imperfect network conditions if
it's always exactly two seconds slow.
But this is gonna kinda be a little
bit different in this case.
So we can go ahead and
open up the console,
just to kinda shrink that
down just a little bit.
So I can see the network requests cool.
As you can see, I request a bunch of them.
They kinda come in and
they kind of loading at different
points all over the place, but
these are random dog facts.
They're gonna get a sampling
of them no matter what.
What would I wanna use, if I wanna be,
we're getting some dog facts,
relax, we'll put them on the page
when we hear back to the API.
We're gonna ignore future
clicks until we're done.
>> Exhaust map.
>> Exhaust map, perfect.
So, let's give that a shot.
So, we'll just change this to an exhaust
map, And we'll use that instead.
You see, I'm going nuts on that button,
but I only sent one network request.
When that network request comes back,
I am welcome to hit the button again.
But RX JS will basically ignore clicks
until it's done doing what it's doing.
Random pop quiz.
For sure we all know the answer.
If I wanted to switch to the newest one,
what would I use instead?
>> Switch map.
Switch map will be like I don't care about
the facts I just requested,
I want the new facts.
They're not real-time or anything,
[LAUGH] it doesn't really matter.
So this case, exhaust map is the right
choice for us at this moment.
Okay, so what happens if this fails or
something?
We already have a slow API,
it's relatively
possible that this API could
return an error, all right?
So we can make that happen.
We got another one called flakiness and
a flakiness of 1 will
make it fail every time.
Flakiness of 2 will make
it fail every other time.
A flakiness of 3, do you get the point?
A flakiness of 3 will
make it every third time.
Let's have it fail all the time right now.
So if I just fire this off, and
we should be able to see the console.
You can see that it blows up.
It doesn't know what to do,
or we got that 500 error.
Things are not great.
But we could deal with that, right?
We could, we have an operator that helps
us deal with these things anytime.
We saw that an observable
ends when it throws an error.
It's effectually inflation event,
we knew how to test for them, we just
haven't seen really how to deal with them.
Sometimes, it depends on the API, right?
It depends on what you wanna do.
Sometimes you wanna me an error message,
right?
Sometimes, you want to try again.
These are all fine things to do, but
you shouldn't just treat it
like everything worked out.
So we can do in this case is we can go
ahead and we have a few options here.
Let's see, we could get a little
more nuanced here as well.
Let's go ahead and say, because from
fetch has an interesting behavior.
From fetch, if it gets a 400 or
500, that's not a promise rejection,
right?
That is theoretically from fetch or fetch,
rather the Fetch API as a whole only
catches if there's no network, right?
This is a fun Progressive Web App thing,
which is you can handle no Internet
different than flaky Internet.
So let's go ahead, And we'll say,
You can do something like, okay,
if response is okay, then we return that.
Now we're using mergeMap, so
we do need to return an observable
no matter what, right?
So we couldn't do something,
if you wanna do it kinda
like the node style,
This would not work because
with that switch map or
exhaust map, it's expecting that
it gets an observable, right?
This promise,
it's gonna turn into an observable.
This is just an object.
>> Could you just wrap it off?
>> Yep, [LAUGH] perfect.
Yeah, you wrap it in off and
now it's an observable.
Cool.
So we've got that kind of error in place.
So that's one way to go ahead and do it.
And so now when we subscribe,
we could deal with that error separately.
There's another way to handle this,
we'll see in a second, but
let's start with this for
now, where we could say,
Facts can come through or
we are gonna kinda almost
handle this like Node.js style,
where we could say,
okay, if there's an error,
Do I have a set error helper?
Yeah, set error with the error message,
otherwise,
I'll just return as,
I don't have to do that.
I can say clear out all the facts that
were in there cuz we're just kind of
appending them before, and we'll say,
I think I have bad facts, right?
So this is one way to handle it.
This is good for errors where
we wanna do something with it.
We still haven't dealt with the idea of
what happens if just things go poorly, and
we can kinda see that in
a little bit as well.
And it's one of the advantages
that we get from Fetch as well,
which it will actually deal
with even bad states for us.
Let's try this out.
Make sure I didn't mess anything up.
So you can see something went wrong,
cuz occasionally API,
this one that we still have flakiness
set to 1 so it will always fail.
Versus if I set that to a 2,
it's expecting an object.
Fails on purpose, or
it's delayed and we get them, right?
So we can handle both situations.